Add English version of GE01 - QGIS plugin development (#72)
GispoCoding/master-training-data: src/GE01_eng/09_extra_9.Rmd

# Extra Python exercises

This section contains examples and exercises for more
advanced Python topics which you can go through
if needed.

## Topic 1: Comprehensions

Comprehensions are a way to create lists and dictionaries _pythonically_ without for
or while loops.

Here's an example of a traditional way to create a list of
numbers 0-10:

::: code-box
```python
decimal_numbers = []
for i in range(11):
    decimal_numbers.append(float(i))
print(decimal_numbers)
```
:::

::: code-box
```python
decimal_numbers = []
i = 0
while i <= 10:
    decimal_numbers.append(float(i))
    i += 1

print(decimal_numbers)
```
:::

With a list comprehension you can do the same on one line:

::: code-box
```python
[float(i) for i in range(11)]
```
:::

In a list comprehension the elements are entered in a slightly different
order than in a normal for loop:

::: code-box
```python
[<expression> for <item> in <list>]

# NOT this
[for <item> in <list> <expression>]
```
:::

> If you have to include a condition in the comprehension, they are included at the end.
> Jos koosteeseen halutaan asettaa ehtoja, ne laitetaan koosteen loppuun. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you need to include conditions in the comprehension, they are included at the end. 
```

::: code-box
```python
[<expression> for <item> in <list> if <condition>]
```
:::

The following list comprehension creates a list of odd decimal number from 0.0 to 10.0.

::: code-box
```python
[float(i) for i in range(11) if i % 2]
```
:::

The same syntax works with sets, only difference is having to use curly brackets.

::: code-box
```python
{str(i) for i in range(11)}
```
:::

> With tuples you first have to create a list and create a tuple from it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With tuples you first have to create a list and then create a tuple from it.
```

::: code-box
```python
tuple([str(i) for i in range(11)])
```
:::

> When using ellipses a generator is created. It evaluates only one element at a time using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using parentheses a generator is created. It evaluates only one element at a time using
```

the `next` function.

::: code-box
```python
print((i ** 2 for i in range(11)))
generator = (i ** 2 for i in range(11))
print(next(generator))
print(next(generator))
print(next(generator))
print(list(generator))
```
:::

You can also create a dictionary:

::: code-box
```python
{f"{key}**2": val ** 2 for key, val in enumerate(range(10))}
```
:::

### Extra exercise 1.1

> Write a list compregension `chose_number` which gets integers 0-20 changed to string so that numbers 9-18 are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Write a list comprehension `chose_number` which gets integers 0-20 changed to string so that numbers 9-18 are
```

excluded.

<button onclick="toggleAnswer(this)" class="btn answer_btn">hint</button>

::: hidden-box
::: code-box
```python
chosen_numbers = [str(value) for value in range(21) <ehtolause> # how to exclude numbers 9-18?
```
:::
:::

<button onclick="toggleAnswer(this)" class="btn answer_btn">answer</button>

::: hidden-box
::: code-box
```python
chosen_numbers = [str(value) for value in range(21) if value < 9 or value > 18]
```
:::
:::

### Nested comprehensions

Sometimes you need to use a comprehension inside a comprehension.
Here the syntax is:

::: code-box
```python
[<expression> for <item1> in <list1> for <item2> in <list2>]
```
:::

::: code-box
```python
[(i, j) for i in range(3) for j in range(3)]
```
:::

The order of the lists matters if values from the first list are used in the seconds
condition.

::: code-box
```python
[(i, j) for i in range(3) for j in range(3) if i == 2]
```
:::

You can have an arbitrary number of comprehensions:

::: code-box
```python
[(i, j, k) for i in range(2) for j in range(3) for k in range(4)]
```
:::

> ## Topic 2: Lambda function

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Topic 2: Lambda functions
```

> In Python you can define one-line lambda functions with the following syntax:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Python you can define "anonymous" one-line lambda functions with the following syntax:
```
Mention anonymity

    def do_multiply():
        return num1 * num2

    return do_multiply()

print(multiply(2, 3))
```
:::

You can also return nested functions.

::: code-box
```python
def multiplier():
    def do_multiply(num1, num2):
        print("Berfore calculation")
        value = num1 * num2
        print("After calculation")
        return value

    return do_multiply

multiply = multiplier()
print(multiply(3, 4))
```
:::

If the original function gets a function as a parameter
it too can be called in the nested function.

::: code-box
```python
def printer(func):
    def wrapper():
        print("Before")
        value = func()
        print("After")
        return value

    return wrapper

def heavy_function():
    print("Doing some hevy lifting...")

decorated_function = printer(heavy_function)
decorated_function()
```
:::

In the example above the `printer` function is already a _decorator_.
Python offers an easier way to use the decorator by decorating
the function definition with the `@decorator_name` syntax.

::: code-box
```python
@printer
def heavy_function2():
    print("This is maybe too much...")

heavy_function2()
```
:::

### Extra exercises 3.1

> Create your own decorator funciont `timeit` which measures how much

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create your own decorator function `timeit` which measures how much
```

::: code-box
```python
a = [1, 2, 3, 4]
d = {"a": 1, "b": 2, "c": 3}

# the items are unpacked as their own parameters to the print function
print(a, 1, 2, 3, 4)
print(a, *a)

# the items in the dictionary are unpacked as their own named parameters to the dict function
print(dict(a=1, b=2, v=3))
print(dict(**d))
```
:::

Parameters can also be given to decorators. In this case you have to use
three nested functions.

::: code-box
```python
def printer(something_else_to_print):
    def decorator(func):
        def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
            print("Arguments: ", args)
            print("Keyword arguments: ", kwargs)
            print("Before", something_else_to_print)
            value = func(*args, **kwargs)
            print("After", something_else_to_print)
            return value

        return wrapper

    return decorator

@printer("the test function")
def tester(param):
    """Prints hello with a parameter"""
    print("Hello", param)

tester(1)
```
:::

### Extra exercise 3.2

Inspect the
[`functools.wraps`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/functools.html?highlight=wraps#functools.wraps)
decorator in Python. It allows saving the metadata of a

> decorated functino such as the docstring. Use the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
decorated function such as the docstring. Use the
```
